[Draft/WIP] Scheduling and Resource Exposure documentation (#2)
kubernetes-sigs/cni-dra-driver: docs/design/scheduling-and-resource-exposure.md

### Use Cases

The CNI-DRA-Driver enables a broad range of use cases within Kubernetes. The following use cases demonstrate how the driver can be used to manage network resources based on different needs and requirements.

#### 1. Full Device

This use case defines the scenario where a pod gets the exclusive access to a physical network interface. The network interface, when unclaimed, is configured on the node but will be moved/injected on the pod during the pod creation making it no longer accessible on this to any other future pod requesting similar network interface access. Other pods requesting the same network interface must be scheduled on a node where the network interface exists and is not already claimed. This is the case with, for example, the Host-Device CNI Plugins. 

#### 2. Virtual Device (Based on Master Interface)

This use case defines the scenario where a pod requires a logical/virtual network interface mapped to another network interface (master interface). The pod will then have to be scheduled on a node where the master interface exists. This is the case with, for example, the MACVLAN and the VLAN CNI Plugins. 

#### 3. IP Pool Exhaustion

> As the number of pods in a cluster increases, IP address management becomes an issue. The IPAM is at risk of exhaustion which could prevent it from providing IPs to new pods, thus new pods should not be scheduled in that case. This issue can happen when a single subnet is shared between several nodes but also when a subnet is sliced per node (e.g. The Cluster subnet is `10.244.0.0/16` where Node-A will allocate IPs on subnet `10.244.1.0/24` and Node-B will allocate IPs on subnet `10.244.1.0/24`).

Reviewer: Do you mean Node-B allocate on `10.244.2.0/24`? (different from A). btw, I think the first subnet can start from `10.244.0.0/24`.

#### 4. Virtual Network Identifier (VNI) Availability

This use case addresses the need for allocating VNIs (VLAN ID, VxLAN ID...) for an network interface requested for a pod while ensuring no other network interface on the same host is using the same VNI. This is the case with, for example, the VLAN CNI Plugins. 

> #### 5. Bandwidth Limitation

Reviewer: Shall we also consider the other meta plugin like firewall, port mapping, tuning?

Author: I guess we can consider them as well, but as written in "7. CNI-Specific Attribute", the possibilities are infinite. Maybe the CNI plugins should somehow create their own ResourceSlice which we could somehow consume via some kind of composition in the request? (as in this example: https://gist.github.com/LionelJouin/c0dd18d8a39b15a6aaa418f95725938d)

Reviewer: Why do we treat them differently from bandwidth CNI? 
They are actually meta plugin which is different from CNI-specific attribute of main plugin. I think we should define and handle them separately.

Author: Thank you for your suggestion, you are right. I added in the summary that we are focusing first on the CNI plugins provided by the CNI project. I also renamed the section about CNI-Specific Attributes. Hope this makes it more clear.

This use case involves scenarios where application pods have specific QoS (Quality of Service) requirement and/or expect some minimum guaranteed performance per network interface. Pods with such requirements must then be scheduled on nodes with sufficient bandwidth capacity. Other scheduled pods must not impact the performance of already running pods. For example, if a pod requests 500 Mbps on a network interface providing 1 Gbps, no additional pod requestiing more than 500 Mbps (or with no bandwidth limits) should be scheduled on that node.

> #### 6. CNI Availability

Reviewer: I think this is more validation that we can automatically discover and use to validate the ResourceClaim.

Author: I think the CNI Availability depends on the node and cannot be checked at validation time. A upgrade of a node could include a new CNI plugin while not the "old" nodes. The readiness cannot be included in the validation either as it requires the CNI `STATUS` operation, this is similar to the node readiness with the `NetworkUnavailable`.

Reviewer: I think we can check availability from the CNI binary folder and reports the present availability at some status specific to each node and on validation of resource claim creation, we just check that value.

Still, I think we may consider rewrite the explanation of this use case. It is not clear whether the driver should be able to provide information of the CNI availability or the driver should be able to select the node that has corresponding available CNI or both. If only the first one, what the driver is supposed to do when the pod is scheduled to the node that is not valid (do not have the binary file).

Author: This has to be done at scheduler level since a CNI could say ready on Node-A, not-ready on Node-B and the binary might not even exist on Node-C. Scheduler will then have to schedule the ResourceClaim on Node-A.

Do you have any suggestion on how to re-write it to make it more clear?

Proper scheduling plays an important role in ensuring that the CNI operations (`ADD`) succeed. The Kubernetes scheduler needs to consider the network resources required by pods to ensure that they are deployed to nodes where the necessary CNI plugins and resources (such as physical devices, IP pools, or specific VNIs) are available. Without effective scheduling, network configuration and resource allocation could fail leading to application downtime, performance issues and complex troubleshooting.

Additionally, this solution will serve as a reference implementation for the [Multi-Network](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/multi-network) project and for the scheduling and resource exposure of network devices.

### Use Cases

The CNI-DRA-Driver enables a broad range of use cases within Kubernetes. The following use cases demonstrate how the driver can be used to manage network resources based on different needs and requirements.

> #### 1. Full Device

Reviewer 2: This is really simple use case and already solved, is good to document it though

This use case defines the scenario where a pod gets the exclusive access to a physical network interface. The network interface, when unclaimed, is configured on the node but will be moved/injected on the pod during the pod creation making it no longer accessible on this to any other future pod requesting similar network interface access. Other pods requesting the same network interface must be scheduled on a node where the network interface exists and is not already claimed. This is the case with, for example, the [Host-Device](https://www.cni.dev/plugins/current/main/host-device/) CNI Plugins. 

#### 2. Virtual Device (Based on Master Interface)

> This use case defines the scenario where a pod requires a logical/virtual network interface mapped to another network interface (master interface). The pod will then have to be scheduled on a node where the master interface exists. This is the case with, for example, the [MACVLAN](https://www.cni.dev/plugins/current/main/macvlan/) and the [VLAN](https://www.cni.dev/plugins/current/main/vlan/) CNI Plugins. 

Reviewer 2: we talked offline about if this can be used as a case of paritionable devices, without pools (cc: @johnbelamaric )

Author: The way I understood KEP-4815 (Partitionable devices), you need to configure and expose your devices in the ResourceSlices. Meaning that if you have want a MacVLAN on top of eth0 (master interface) that will "reserve" 300mbps bandwidth and that will consume 2 IPs (1 IPv4 and 1 IPv6) provided by whereabouts (An IPAM CNI), then you need this device to be existing in the ResourceSlice, the ResourceClaim will only claim that device (Maybe consume part of this device would be helpful in that case). The advantage of KEP-4815 is the possibility to consume capacities of devices from another device in the ResourceSlice.

Maybe the way I had in mind to model/expose the network virtual devices is wrong.

#### 3. IP Pool Exhaustion

> As the number of pods in a cluster increases, IP address management becomes an issue. The IPAM is at risk of exhaustion which could prevent it from providing IPs to new pods, thus new pods should not be scheduled in that case. This issue can happen when a single subnet is shared between several nodes but also when a subnet is sliced per node (e.g. The Cluster subnet is `10.244.0.0/16` where Node-A will allocate IPs on subnet `10.244.0.0/24` and Node-B will allocate IPs on subnet `10.244.1.0/24`).

Reviewer 2: This is the part that it looks to me related to configuration and not provisioning, also it does seem to apply only for the case where the interfaces will belong to kubernetes "multineworks", I find unlikely that someone will delegate the IPAM on a datacenter to the cloud , that seem what VLAN, MACVLAN, full device, ...  use cases target, since I expect the device to be connected to an external network

Author: Right, this case does not only belong to Kubernetes Multi-Network, it is also about devices connected to external networks. But still, multi Kubernetes network is still required.

Reviewer 2: yeah, just that I found this as a source of confusion in all conversations, so I think you may want to contextualize , as "when the IPAM is provided by Kubernetes ..." , so it is clear that problem refers to scenarios, does not matter bare metal, cloud, ... that in addition to the interface management, kubernetes also provide the interface configuration (a vlan or entire device may get the config via dhcp)

> #### 4. Virtual Network Identifier (VNI) Availability

Reviewer 2: not same as 2?

Author: Using the VLAN CNI plugin, if let's say the vlan interface with VNI 400 on top of eth0 is created on pod-a on node-1, then no other pod will be able to get a vlan interface with VNI 400 on top of eth0 on the same node-a (as the vlan with VNI 400 on top of eth0 is already existing on the node).
Otherwise, as an admin, maybe I want to limit the vlan exposed on the node for each specific interfaces.

Reviewer 2: sorry but I'm not sure I completely get it, are we talking about a global vlan id 400 that affect all interfaces and a vlan id 400 that is different per interface?

Reviewer 3: I'm also confused here ... why wouldn't I want to connect pods on the same broadcast domain (let's say ... vlan) on the same host ?

This use case addresses the need for allocating VNIs (VLAN ID, VxLAN ID...) for an network interface requested for a pod while ensuring no other network interface on the same host is using the same VNI. This is the case with, for example, the [VLAN](https://www.cni.dev/plugins/current/main/vlan/) CNI Plugin.

#### 5. Bandwidth Limitation

This use case involves scenarios where application pods have specific QoS (Quality of Service) requirement and/or expect some minimum guaranteed performance per network interface. Pods with such requirements must then be scheduled on nodes with sufficient bandwidth capacity. Other scheduled pods must not impact the performance of already running pods. For example, if a pod requests 500 Mbps on a network interface providing 1 Gbps, no additional pod requestiing more than 500 Mbps (or with no bandwidth limits) should be scheduled on that node. This is the case with, for example, the [bandwidth](https://www.cni.dev/plugins/current/meta/bandwidth/) meta CNI Plugin.

#### 6. CNI Availability

> This use case refers to the requirements that specific CNI plugins must be available and ready on nodes in order to be able to execute CNI operations. The readiness of a CNI Plugin can be discovered via the `STATUS` operation.

Reviewer: > Do you have any suggestion on how to re-write it to make it more clear?

@LionelJouin  How's about the explanation below? Please feel free to use and modify.

```suggestion
This use case addresses the requirement that the status of specific CNI plugins, including their availability and readiness, must be monitored and accessible to ensure a pod can only be scheduled on a node where the requested CNI is in a ready state.
```
